---
title: 'User Authentication'
weight: 5
---

## User Authentication

Our earlier discussion of authentication involves messages and sessions. But what about users? If a system cannot authenticate a user, then authenticating that amessage came from that user is pointless. Thus, amajor security problem for operating systems is **user authentication**. The protection system depends on the ability to identify the programs and processes currently executing, which in turn depends on the ability to identify each user of the system. Users normally identify themselves, but how do we determine whether a user’s identity is authentic? Generally, user authentication is based on one or more of three things: the user’s possession of something (a key or card), the user’s knowledge of something (a user identifier and password), or an attribute of the user (fingerprint, retina pattern, or signature).  

### Passwords

The most common approach to authenticating a user identity is the use of **passwords**. When the user identifies herself by user ID or account name, she is asked for a password. If the user-supplied password matches the password stored in the system, the system assumes that the account is being accessed by the owner of that account.

Passwords are often used to protect objects in the computer system, in the absence of more complete protection schemes. They can be considered a special case of either keys or capabilities. For instance, a password may be associated with each resource (such as a file). Whenever a request is made to use the resource, the passwordmust be given. If the password is correct, access is granted. Different passwords may be associated with different access rights. For example, different passwords may be used for reading files, appending files, and updating files.

In practice, most systems require only one password for a user to gain their full rights. Althoughmore passwords theoreticallywould bemore secure, such systems tend not to be implemented due to the classic trade-off between security and convenience. If security makes something inconvenient, then the security is frequently bypassed or otherwise circumvented.

### Password Vulnerabilities

Passwords are extremely common because they are easy to understand and use. Unfortunately, passwords can often be guessed, accidentally exposed, sniffed (read by an eavesdropper), or illegally transferred from an authorized user to an unauthorized one, as we show next.

There are three common ways to guess a password. One way is for the intruder (either human or program) to know the user or to have information about the user. All too frequently, people use obvious information (such as the names of their cats or spouses) as their passwords. Another way is to use brute force, trying enumeration—or all possible combinations of valid password characters (letters, numbers, and punctuation on some systems)—until the password is found. Short passwords are especially vulnerable to this method. For example, a four-character password provides only 10,000 variations. On average, guessing 5,000 times would produce a correct hit. A program that could try a password every millisecond would take only about 5 seconds to guess a four-character password. Enumeration is less successfulwhere systems allow longer passwords that include both uppercase and lowercase letters, along with numbers and all punctuation characters. Of course, users must take advantage of the large password space and must not, for example, use only lowercase letters. The third, common method is dictionary attacks where all words, word variations, and common passwords are tried.

In addition to being guessed, passwords can be exposed as a result of visual or electronic monitoring. An intruder can look over the shoulder of a user (**shoulder surfin** ) when the user is logging in and can learn the password easily by watching the keyboard. Alternatively, anyone with access to the network on which a computer resides can seamlessly add a network monitor, allowing him to **sniff**, or watch, all data being transferred on the network, including user IDs and passwords. Encrypting the data stream containing the password solves this problem. Even such a system could have passwords stolen, however. For example, if a file is used to contain the passwords, it could be copied for off-system analysis. Or consider a Trojan-horse program installed on the system that captures every keystroke before sending it on to the application. Another common method to grab passwords, specially debit card passcodes, is installing physical devices where the codes are used and recording what the user does, for example a “skimmer” at an ATM machine or a device installed between the keyboard and the computer.

Exposure is a particularly severe problem if the password is written down where it can be read or lost. Some systems force users to select hard-to- remember or long passwords, or to change their password frequently, which may cause a user to record the password or to reuse it. As a result, such sys- tems provide much less security than systems that allow users to select easy passwords!

The final type of password compromise, illegal transfer, is the result of human nature. Most computer installations have a rule that forbids users to share accounts. This rule is sometimes implemented for accounting reasons but is often aimed at improving security. For instance, suppose one user ID is shared by several users, and a security breach occurs from that user ID. It is impossible to know who was using the ID at the time the break occurred or even whether the user was an authorized one. With one user per user ID, any user can be questioned directly about use of the account; in addition, the user might notice something different about the account and detect the break-in. Sometimes, users break account-sharing rules to help friends or to circum- vent accounting, and this behavior can result in a system’s being accessed by unauthorized users—possibly harmful ones.

Passwords can be either generated by the system or selected by a user. System-generatedpasswordsmaybedifficult to remember, and thus usersmay write them down. As mentioned, however, user-selected passwords are often easy to guess (the user’s name or favorite car, for example). Some systems will check a proposed password for ease of guessing or cracking before accepting it. Some systems also **_age_** passwords, forcing users to change their passwords at regular intervals (every three months, for instance). This method is not foolproof either, because users can easily toggle between two passwords. The solution, as implemented on some systems, is to record a password history for each user. For instance, the system could record the last _N_ passwords and not allow their reuse.

Several variants on these simple password schemes can be used. For exam- ple, the password can be changed more frequently. At the extreme, the pass- word is changed from session to session. A new password is selected (either by the system or by the user) at the end of each session, and that password must be used for the next session. In such a case, even if a password is used by an unauthorized person, that person can use it only once. When the legitimate user tries to use a now-invalid password at the next session, he discovers the security violation. Steps can then be taken to repair the breached security.

### Securing Passwords

One problem with all these approaches is the difficulty of keeping the pass- word secret within the computer. How can the system store a password securely yet allow its use for authentication when the user presents her pass-  

**_STRONG AND EASY TO REMEMBER PASSWORDS_**

It is extremely important to use strong (hard to guess and hard to shoulder surf) passwords on critical systems like bank accounts. It is also important to not use the same password on lots of systems, as one less important, easily hacked system could reveal the password you use on more important systems. A good technique is to generate your password by using the first letter of each word of an easily remembered phrase using both upper and lower characters with a number or punctuation mark thrown in for good measure. For example, the phrase “My girlfriend’s name is Katherine” might yield the password “Mgn.isK!”. The password is hard to crack but easy for the user to remember. Amore secure system would allow more characters in its passwords. Indeed, a systemmight also allow passwords to include the space character, so that a user could create a **passphrase** which is easy to remember but difficult to break.

word? The UNIX system uses secure hashing to avoid the necessity of keeping its password list secret. Because the password is hashed rather than encrypted, it is impossible for the system to decrypt the stored value and determine the original password.

Hash functions are easy to compute, but hard (if not impossible) to invert. That is, given a value _x_, it is easy to compute the hash function value _f_ (_x_). Given a function value _f_ (_x_), however, it is impossible to compute _x_. This function is used to encode all passwords. Only encoded passwords are stored. When a user presents a password, it is hashed and compared against the stored encoded password. Even if the stored encoded password is seen, it cannot be decoded, so the password cannot be determined. Thus, the password file does not need to be kept secret.

The drawback to this method is that the system no longer has control over the passwords. Although the passwords are hashed, anyone with a copy of the password file can run fast hash routines against it—hashing each word in a dictionary, for instance, and comparing the results against the passwords. If the user has selected a password that is also a word in the dictionary, the password is cracked. On sufficiently fast computers, or even on clusters of slow computers, such a comparison may take only a few hours. Furthermore, because systems use well-known hashing algorithms, an attacker might keep a cache of passwords that have been cracked previously.

For these reasons, systems include a “salt,” or recorded random number, in the hashing algorithm. The salt value is added to the password to ensure that if two plaintext passwords are the same, they result in different hash values. In addition, the salt value makes hashing a dictionary ineffective, because each dictionary term would need to be combined with each salt value for comparison to the stored passwords. Newer versions of UNIX also store the hashed password entries in a file readable only by the superuser. The programs that compare the hash to the stored value run setuid to root, so they can read this file, but other users cannot.  

### One-Time Passwords

To avoid the problems of password sniffing and shoulder surfing, a system can use a set of **paired passwords**. When a session begins, the system randomly selects and presents one part of a password pair; the usermust supply the other part. In this system, the user is **_challenged_** and must **_respond_** with the correct answer to that challenge.

This approach can be generalized to the use of an algorithm as a password. In this scheme, the system and the user share a symmetric password. The password _pw_ is never transmitted over amedium that allows exposure. Rather, the password is used as input to a function, alongwith a **_challenge_** _ch_ presented by the system. The user then computes the function _H_(_pw_, _ch_). The result of this function is transmitted as the authenticator to the computer. Because the computer also knows _pw_ and _ch_, it can perform the same computation. If the results match, the user is authenticated. The next time the user needs to be authenticated, another _ch_ is generated, and the same steps ensue. This time, the authenticator is different. Such algorithmic passwords are not susceptible to reuse. That is, a user can type in a password, and no entity intercepting that passwordwill be able to reuse it. This **one-time password** system is one of only a few ways to prevent improper authentication due to password exposure.

One-time password systems are implemented in various ways. Commer- cial implementations use hardware calculators with a display or a display and numeric keypad. These calculators generally take the shape of a credit card, a key-chain dongle, or a USB device. Software running on computers or smartphones provides the user with _H_(_pw_, _ch_); _pw_ can be input by the user or generated by the calculator in synchronization with the computer. Some- times, _pw_ is just a **personal identificatio number** (**PIN**). The output of any of these systems shows the one-time password. A one-time password gener- ator that requires input by the user involves **two-factor authentication**. Two different types of components are needed in this case—for example, a one- time password generator that generates the correct response only if the PIN is valid. Two-factor authentication offers far better authentication protection than single-factor authentication because it requires “something you have” as well as “something you know.”

### Biometrics

Yet another variation on the use of passwords for authentication involves the use of biometricmeasures. Palm- or hand-readers are commonly used to secure physical access—for example, access to a data center. These readers match stored parameters against what is being read from hand-reader pads. The parameters can include a temperature map, as well as finger length, finger width, and line patterns. These devices are currently too large and expensive to be used for normal computer authentication.

Fingerprint readers have become accurate and cost-effective. These devices read finger ridge patterns and convert them into a sequence of numbers. Over time, they can store a set of sequences to adjust for the location of the finger on the reading pad and other factors. Software can then scan a finger on the pad and compare its features with these stored sequences to determine if they match. Of course, multiple users can have profiles stored, and the scanner can differentiate among them. A very accurate two-factor authentication scheme can result from requiring a password as well as a user name and fingerprint scan. If this information is encrypted in transit, the system can be very resistant to spoofing or replay attack.

**Multifactor authentication** is better still. Consider how strong authentica- tion can bewith a USB device that must be plugged into the system, a PIN, and a fingerprint scan. Except for having to place one’s finger on a pad and plug the USB into the system, this authentication method is no less convenient than that using normal passwords. Recall, though, that strong authentication by itself is not sufficient to guarantee the ID of the user. An authenticated session can still be hijacked if it is not encrypted.
